Vignette on the add_*/remove_*/update_*, adjust_* and tidy functions (#274)
cmu-delphi/epipredict: vignettes/update.Rmd

---
title: "Using the add/update/remove and adjust functions"
output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Using the update and adjust functions}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

```{r, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  echo = TRUE,
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>",
  out.width = "100%"
)
```

```{r setup, message=FALSE}
library(epipredict)

> library(recipes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
library(recipes)
library(dplyr)
library(workflows)
```

```

> In this vignette, we will state the main goal of the add/update/remove and adjust functions and describe what part of the processing each function is intended for. We will then demonstrate how to use the sets of add/update/remove functions, followed by the adjust functions, and end with a brief discussion on the tidy methods for recipe and frosting objects. 

Reviewer: Can you add carriage returns so that this line breaks at 80 characters? Makes reviewing and editing much easier. Same for much of the below.

## Main goal of the add/update/remove and adjust functions

> The primary goal of the update and adjust functions is to allow the user to modify a `step`, `layer`, `epi_recipe`, `frosting`, or a part of an `epi_workflow` so that they do not have to create a new object each time they wish to make a change to the pre-processing, fitting, or post-processing.

Reviewer: for functions, it's better to end them with open+close parenthesis. I think here, these are all "objects", so it doesn't need that, but maybe clearer then to add "objects" in the sentence.

> In the context of pre-processing, the goal of the update functions is to add/remove/update an `epi_recipe` or a step in it. For this, we have `add_epi_recipe`, `update_epi_recipe`, and `remove_epi_recipe` to add/update/remove an entire `epi_recipe` in an `epi_workflow` as well as `adjust_epi_recipe` to adjust a particular step in an `epi_recipe` or `epi_workflow` by the step number or name. For a model, one may `add_model`, `update_model`, or `remove_model` in an `epi_workflow`. For post-processing, where the goal is to update a frosting object or a layer in it, we have `add_frosting`, `remove_frosting`, and `update_frosting` to add/update/remove an entire `frosting` object in an `epi_workflow` as well as `adjust_frosting` to adjust a particular layer in a `frosting` or `epi_workflow` by its number or name. A summary of the function uses by processing step is shown by the following table:

Reviewer: For example:

```suggestion
In the context of pre-processing, the goal of the update functions is to add/remove/update an 
`epi_recipe` or a step in it. For this, we have `add_epi_recipe()`, `update_epi_recipe()`, and `remove_epi_recipe()` to alter an entire `epi_recipe` in an `epi_workflow` as well as 
`adjust_epi_recipe()` to alter the arguments to a particular step in an `epi_recipe` or `epi_workflow` by the step number or name. 

For a model, one may `add_model()`, `update_model()`, or `remove_model()` in an `epi_workflow`. 

For post-processing, where the goal is to update a frosting object or a layer in it, we have `add_frosting()`, `remove_frosting()`, and `update_frosting()` to alter the entire `frosting` object in an `epi_workflow` as 
well as `adjust_frosting()` to alter the arguments to a  particular layer in a `frosting` or `epi_workflow` by 
its number or name. 

A summary of the function uses by processing step is shown by the following table:
```

|                            | Add/update/remove functions                                | adjust functions    |
|----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|

> | Pre-processing  | `add_epi_recipe`, `update_epi_recipe`, `remove_epi_recipe` | `adjust_epi_recipe` |

Reviewer: more functions.

| Model specification        | `add_model`, `update_model` `remove_model`                 |                     |
| Post-processing | `add_frosting`, `remove_frosting`, `update_frosting`       | `adjust_frosting`   |

Since adding/removing/updating frosting as well as adjusting a layer in a `frosting` object proceeds in the same way as performing those tasks on an `epi_recipe`, we will focus on implementing those for an `epi_recipe` in this vignette and only briefly go through some examples for a `frosting` object.

## Add/update/remove an `epi_recipe` in an `epi_workflow`

We start with the built-in `case_death_rate_subset` dataset that contains JHU daily COVID-19 cases and deaths by state and take a subset of it from Nov. 1, 2021 to Dec. 31, 2021 for the four states of Alaska, California, New York, and South Carolina.

```{r}
jhu <- case_death_rate_subset %>%

>   dplyr::filter(time_value >= as.Date("2021-11-01"), geo_value %in% c("ak", "ca", "ny", "sc"))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  filter(time_value >= as.Date("2021-11-01"), geo_value %in% c("ak", "ca", "ny", "sc"))
```

```{r}
wf <- epi_workflow() %>%
  add_epi_recipe(r)

wf
```

We may then go on to add the fitted linear model to our `epi_workflow`:
```{r}
# Fit a linear model
wf <- epi_workflow(r, parsnip::linear_reg()) %>% fit(jhu)

wf
```

At this stage, suppose we decide to overhaul our recipe so that we have a different set of pre-processing steps or we want to make multiple changes to existing steps, but we desire to keep the remainder of the `epi_workflow` the same. We can use the `update_epi_recipe` function to trade our current recipe `r` for another recipe `r2` in `wf` as follows:

```{r}
r2 <- epi_recipe(jhu) %>%
  step_epi_lag(death_rate, lag = c(0, 1, 7, 14)) %>%
  step_epi_lag(case_rate, lag = c(0:7, 14)) %>%
  step_epi_ahead(death_rate, ahead = 7) %>%
  step_epi_naomit()

wf <- update_epi_recipe(wf, r2)
wf
```
You can see that the output of `wf` depicts the sequence of steps in `r2` instead of `r`, which indicates that the update was successful.

A longer approach to achieve the same end is to use `remove_epi_recipe` to remove the old recipe and then `add_epi_recipe` to add the new one. Under the hood, the `update_epi_recipe` function operates in this way. 

> The `add_epi_recipe` and `remove_epi_recipe` functions offload to the `workflows` versions of the functions (`workflows::add_recipe()` and `workflows::remove_recipe()`) as much as possible. The main reason for using the `epipredict` version is so that we ensure that we do not lose the `epi_workflow` class. 

Reviewer: I prefer package names to go in curly braces. (Good use of paren on the function names here.)

```suggestion
The `add_epi_recipe()` and `remove_epi_recipe()` functions offload to the `{workflows}` versions of the 
functions  as much as possible. The main reason for using the `{epipredict}` version is so that we ensure 
that we retain the `epi_workflow` class. 
```

To see this, let's look at what happens if we remove our current `epi_recipe` using `workflows::remove_recipe` and then inspect the class of `wf`:

```{r}
wf %>% class() # class before

> workflows::remove_recipe(wf) %>% class() # class after removing recipe using workflows function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
workflows::remove_recipe(wf) %>% class() # class after removing recipe using workflows function
```

```

We can observe that `wf` is no longer an `epi_workflow` and a `workflow`. It has been demoted to only a `workflow`. While all `epi_workflow`s are `workflow`s, not all `workflow`s are `epi_workflow`s, meaning that there may be compatibility issues and limitations to the tools that may be used from the `epipredict` package on a plain `workflow` object. 

> Now, while we checked what happens to the above `epi_recipe` if we remove it, note that we did not actually store that change to `wf` (using the assignment operator `<-`). Hence, our `epi_workflow` remains unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, while we checked what happens to the above `epi_recipe` if we remove it, note that we did not actually store that change to `wf`. 
```

```{r}
update_frosting
```

If we decide that we do not want the `frosting` post-processing at all, we can remove the `frosting` object from the workflow and make predictions as follows: 

```{r}
wf3 <- wf2 %>% remove_frosting()
p3 <- predict(wf3, latest)
p3
```
You can see that the above results from `p3` are the same as from `p1`, when we simply have a prediction layer in the `frosting` post-processing container.

## Adjust a single step of an `epi_recipe`

Suppose that we just want to change a single step in an `epi_recipe` (that is either standalone or a part of an `epi_workflow`). Instead of replacing an entire `epi_recipe`, we can use the `adjust_epi_recipe` function. In this function, the step to be adjusted is indicated either the step number or name in the `which_step` parameter. Then, the parameter name and update value must be inputted as `...`.

For instance, suppose that we decide to lead the `death_rate` by 14 days instead of 7. We may adjust this step in `wf` recipe by setting `which_step` to the step number in the order of operations, which can be obtained by inspecting `r2` or the tidy summary of it:

```{r}

> workflows::extract_preprocessor(wf) # step_epi_ahead is the third step in r2
> tidy(workflows::extract_preprocessor(wf)) # tidy tibble summary of r2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extract_preprocessor(wf) # step_epi_ahead is the third step in r2
tidy(extract_preprocessor(wf)) # tidy tibble summary of r2
```

wf <- wf %>% adjust_epi_recipe(which_step = 3, ahead = 14)
```

Alternatively, we may adjust that step by name by specifying the full name of the step, `step_epi_ahead`, in `which_step`:

```{r}
wf %>% adjust_epi_recipe(which_step = "step_epi_ahead", ahead = 14) # not overwrite r2 because same result
```

If there are at least two steps in a recipe that share the same name, specifying the name in `which_step` will throw an error as `adjust_epi_recipe` is not intended to be used to modify multiple steps at once. The way, then, to modify a step that has the same name as another is to indicate what number it is in the ordering of the steps. For example, in `r2` there are two steps named `step_epi_lag` - the first step where we lag the death rate, and the second where we lag the case rate. If we want to modify the lags for the `case_rate` variable, we would specify the step number of 2 in `which_step`. 

```{r}
wf <- wf %>% adjust_epi_recipe(which_step = 2, lag = c(0, 1, 7, 14, 21))

> workflows::extract_preprocessor(wf)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extract_preprocessor(wf)
```

```

We could adjust a recipe directly in the same way as we adjust a recipe in a workflow. The main difference is that we would not input `wf` as the first argument to `adjust_epi_recipe` but rather `r2`.

```{r}
adjust_epi_recipe(r2, which_step = 2, lag = c(0, 1, 7, 14, 21)) # should be same result as above
```

Note that when we adjust the `r2` object directly, we are not adjusting the recipe in the `epi_workflow`. That is, if we modify a step in `r2`, the change will not automatically transfer over to `wf`. We would need to modify the recipe in `wf` directly (`adjust_epi_recipe` on `wf`) or update the recipe in `wf` with a new `epi_recipe` that has undergone the adjustment (using `update_epi_recipe`):

```{r}
r2 <- adjust_epi_recipe(r2, which_step = 2, lag = 0:21)

> workflows::extract_preprocessor(wf)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extract_preprocessor(wf)
```

Author: I think I'm going to keep the `workflows::` for now because it's a quick and clear way to indicate what functions I used are from that package & I think it's good to lay that out somewhere (because otherwise it can be hard to tell for a beginner which functions are from that package and which are from ours - because it's not exceedingly common).
